Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the cardiac conducting system and the electrocardiogram.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the cardiac conducting system.
The conducting system is the specialised network of cardiac muscle cells that
generates and conducts the electrical impulse, ensuring the coordinated,
sequential contraction of the chambers.
It begins at the sinoatrial node, in the wall of the right atrium,
the normal pacemaker, which spontaneously generates the impulse.
The impulse spreads across the atria, causing atrial contraction,
and converges on the atrioventricular node,
low in the interatrial septum — the only normal electrical connection between atria
and ventricles.
Here conduction is deliberately slowed, the atrioventricular delay,
allowing the atria to complete filling of the ventricles before they contract.
From the atrioventricular node the impulse passes into the bundle of His,
which divides into the right and left bundle branches running down the
interventricular septum, and these ramify into the Purkinje fibres,
which spread rapidly through the ventricular walls,
delivering the impulse so that the ventricles contract almost simultaneously from
the apex upward.
So the conducting system runs from the sinoatrial node, the pacemaker,
across the atria to the atrioventricular node, where conduction is slowed,
then through the bundle of His, the bundle branches and the Purkinje fibres to the
ventricles — generating the impulse and conducting it in the correct sequence and
timing for coordinated contraction.
How does the sinoatrial node generate spontaneous rhythmic impulses?
The cells of the sinoatrial node, unlike the working myocytes,
have the property of automaticity — they generate their own rhythmic action
potentials — because they have an unstable resting membrane potential that
spontaneously depolarises.
Rather than a stable phase four, the pacemaker cell has a slow,
spontaneous depolarisation during diastole, the pacemaker potential,
which gradually carries the membrane up to threshold,
at which point an action potential is fired; the cycle then repeats.
This slow depolarisation is produced by a combination of ionic currents:
a slow inward current, the so-called funny current,
carried by sodium through channels activated on repolarisation;
a declining potassium efflux; and inward calcium currents as threshold approaches.
The upstroke of the nodal action potential is itself slow,
driven by calcium rather than sodium. The rate of the pacemaker potential sets the
heart rate.
So the sinoatrial node generates rhythmic impulses through automaticity:
an unstable membrane potential with a slow spontaneous pacemaker depolarisation —
produced by the funny current, declining potassium efflux and calcium currents —
that carries the cell to threshold to fire a calcium-driven action potential,
the rate of this depolarisation setting the heart rate.
Why is the sinoatrial node the dominant pacemaker,
and what is the pacemaker hierarchy?
Although the sinoatrial node is the normal pacemaker,
it is not the only tissue capable of automaticity:
the atrioventricular node and the His-Purkinje system can also depolarise
spontaneously and act as pacemakers.
The reason the sinoatrial node dominates is that it has the fastest intrinsic rate
of spontaneous depolarisation — around sixty to a hundred per minute — so it
reaches threshold and fires before the slower potential pacemakers do;
each impulse it generates spreads and discharges the others before they can fire
spontaneously, a phenomenon called overdrive suppression.
There is thus a hierarchy: the sinoatrial node fastest,
then the atrioventricular junction at around forty to sixty per minute,
then the ventricular Purkinje system slowest, at around twenty to forty.
This hierarchy is a safety mechanism:
if the sinoatrial node fails or conduction is blocked,
a slower subsidiary pacemaker takes over, an escape rhythm,
maintaining a heartbeat, though slower.
So the sinoatrial node dominates because it has the fastest intrinsic rate and
discharges the slower potential pacemakers before they fire — overdrive
suppression; the hierarchy from sinoatrial node to atrioventricular junction to
ventricle provides escape pacemakers should the faster fail,
a vital safety mechanism.
Describe the autonomic control of heart rate and conduction.
The intrinsic rate of the sinoatrial node is continuously modulated by the
autonomic nervous system, which adjusts the heart rate and conduction to the body's
needs, the two divisions acting in opposition.
The parasympathetic supply, via the vagus nerve,
releases acetylcholine acting on muscarinic receptors at the sinoatrial and
atrioventricular nodes; it slows the pacemaker depolarisation,
reducing the heart rate — a negative chronotropic effect — and slows
atrioventricular conduction — a negative dromotropic effect.
At rest, vagal tone predominates, holding the heart rate below the intrinsic rate.
The sympathetic supply releases noradrenaline acting on beta-one adrenoceptors
throughout the heart; it steepens the pacemaker depolarisation,
increasing the heart rate, speeds conduction, and also increases contractility.
So heart rate and conduction are controlled by the opposing autonomic divisions:
the parasympathetic, through vagal acetylcholine on muscarinic receptors,
slowing the rate and conduction and dominant at rest; the sympathetic,
through noradrenaline on beta-one receptors, increasing the rate,
conduction and contractility — the balance adjusting cardiac performance to demand.
What does the electrocardiogram represent?
The electrocardiogram is the recording, from electrodes on the body surface,
of the electrical activity of the heart — specifically the summed electrical
potentials generated as the wave of depolarisation and repolarisation spreads
through the myocardium.
It does not record contraction directly, but the electrical events that trigger it.
Because the body's tissues conduct these potentials to the surface,
the changing electrical vectors of the cardiac cycle can be detected as small
voltage changes between electrodes, displayed against time.
Each phase of the cardiac electrical cycle produces a characteristic deflection:
the spread of depolarisation through the atria, through the ventricles,
and the repolarisation of the ventricles.
By recording from multiple electrode positions, or leads,
the activity is viewed from different directions,
giving information about the origin, spread and timing of the impulse,
and about the state of the myocardium.
So the electrocardiogram represents the summed electrical activity of the heart —
the spread of depolarisation and repolarisation through the myocardium — detected
as voltage changes at the body surface and displayed against time,
viewed from multiple leads; a record of the heart's electrical, not mechanical,
events, fundamental to assessing rhythm, conduction and myocardial state.
Describe the normal waveform of the electrocardiogram.
The normal electrocardiogram, plotted as voltage on the vertical axis against time
on the horizontal axis, shows a characteristic sequence of deflections for each
beat, each corresponding to an electrical event.
The P wave is the first, a small deflection produced by atrial depolarisation,
which triggers atrial contraction.
The QRS complex is the large, sharp deflection produced by ventricular
depolarisation, which triggers ventricular contraction;
atrial repolarisation is hidden within it. The T wave is the broader deflection
following, produced by ventricular repolarisation.
Between these, the intervals carry meaning: the P-R interval,
from the start of the P wave to the QRS,
reflects the time for conduction through the atria and the atrioventricular delay;
the QRS duration reflects the time for ventricular depolarisation;
and the Q-T interval, from the QRS to the end of the T wave,
reflects the total duration of ventricular depolarisation and repolarisation.
So the normal electrocardiogram shows the P wave of atrial depolarisation,
the QRS complex of ventricular depolarisation,
and the T wave of ventricular repolarisation,
with the P-R interval reflecting atrioventricular conduction,
the QRS duration ventricular depolarisation,
and the Q-T interval the ventricular action-potential duration — each feature
mapping to an electrical event.
How does the electrocardiogram relate to the cardiac cycle and to electrolyte
disturbance?
The electrocardiogram's electrical events precede and trigger the mechanical events
of the cardiac cycle, so the two are closely related in time.
The P wave of atrial depolarisation precedes atrial contraction,
which completes ventricular filling.
The QRS complex of ventricular depolarisation precedes ventricular contraction and
ejection, the first heart sound following the QRS.
The T wave of ventricular repolarisation corresponds to the end of systole and the
onset of relaxation, the second heart sound near its end.
The electrocardiogram is also sensitive to electrolyte disturbances,
because these alter the membrane potentials and currents:
hyperkalaemia produces characteristic changes — peaked T waves,
then widening of the QRS and loss of P waves, progressing dangerously;
hypokalaemia flattens the T wave and produces U waves;
disturbances of calcium alter the Q-T interval,
hypocalcaemia prolonging and hypercalcaemia shortening it.
So the electrocardiogram's waves precede the mechanical events — the P wave before
atrial contraction, the QRS before ventricular ejection,
the T wave at the onset of relaxation — and it reflects electrolyte disturbances,
notably the progressive changes of hyperkalaemia and the Q-T changes of calcium
disturbance, making it a valuable monitor of both rhythm and the myocardial
environment.
What is the relevance of the conducting system and electrocardiogram to anaesthesia?
The conducting system and the electrocardiogram are of constant relevance to
anaesthesia, the electrocardiogram being a fundamental,
continuous monitor throughout every anaesthetic.
It is used to monitor the heart rate and rhythm,
detecting the arrhythmias that anaesthesia, surgery, autonomic changes,
electrolyte disturbances and drugs may provoke — from bradycardias,
including the vagally mediated and the conduction blocks, to tachyarrhythmias.
It detects myocardial ischaemia, through changes in the ST segment and T wave,
a major perioperative concern.
It reveals the effects of electrolyte disturbances,
particularly the dangerous changes of hyperkalaemia, and of drugs,
including those that prolong the Q-T interval and predispose to arrhythmia.
Understanding the autonomic control of the conducting system underlies the
management of rate and rhythm, with vagal effects,
beta-blockade and other interventions.
So the conducting system and electrocardiogram are central to anaesthesia through
continuous monitoring of rate and rhythm,
the detection of arrhythmias and of myocardial ischaemia,
and the recognition of electrolyte and drug effects — the electrocardiogram being
one of the essential monitors and its understanding fundamental to managing the
heart perioperatively.
Pull it together: trace the electrical impulse through the heart and its appearance
on the electrocardiogram.
I would trace it as the orderly sequence that produces coordinated contraction and
is recorded on the electrocardiogram. The impulse arises spontaneously in the
sinoatrial node, the dominant pacemaker by virtue of its fastest automaticity,
modulated by the autonomic system.
It spreads across the atria, depolarising them — the P wave — and triggering atrial
contraction. It reaches the atrioventricular node,
where it is deliberately delayed — the P-R interval — allowing the atria to
complete ventricular filling.
It then passes rapidly through the bundle of His,
the bundle branches and the Purkinje fibres to depolarise the ventricles — the QRS
complex — triggering their coordinated contraction and ejection.
Finally the ventricles repolarise — the T wave — and relax.
The hierarchy of pacemakers provides safety,
and the whole is adjusted by the autonomic system.
So the impulse travels from the sinoatrial node across the atria,
through the delaying atrioventricular node,
and via the His-Purkinje system to the ventricles, producing in turn the P wave,
P-R interval, QRS complex and T wave — an integrated electrical sequence ensuring
timed, coordinated contraction and recorded, beat by beat, on the electrocardiogram.
Describe the atrial and nodal action potentials and how they differ from the
ventricular.
The action potentials of the different cardiac tissues vary in form,
suiting each to its role, and fall broadly into the fast-response and slow-response
types.
The ventricular action potential, already described, is a fast response:
a rapid sodium-driven upstroke, a long calcium plateau,
and a stable resting potential.
The atrial action potential is also a fast response with a sodium-driven upstroke,
but it is briefer, with a less distinct plateau.
The action potentials of the sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes are quite
different — slow responses: they have no stable resting potential but a spontaneous
pacemaker depolarisation, a more negative range,
and an upstroke that is slow and driven by calcium rather than sodium,
since these cells lack the fast sodium channels.
This slow, calcium-dependent conduction accounts for the slow conduction through
the atrioventricular node — the atrioventricular delay.
So the atrial and ventricular cells have fast-response action potentials with
sodium-driven upstrokes, the ventricular having the long plateau,
whereas the sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodal cells have slow-response action
potentials with spontaneous pacemaker depolarisation and slow,
calcium-driven upstrokes — the slow nodal conduction underlying the
atrioventricular delay, and the differences explaining the tissues' distinct
behaviours.
Describe the ECG leads and the cardiac axis.
The standard twelve-lead electrocardiogram records the heart's electrical activity
from twelve different viewpoints, or leads, each a particular orientation,
so that the spread of the electrical vector can be assessed in three dimensions.
The six limb leads view the heart in the vertical, frontal plane:
the three bipolar leads — one, two and three — measuring between pairs of limb
electrodes, forming Einthoven's triangle, and the three augmented unipolar leads.
The six chest, or precordial, leads view the heart in the horizontal plane,
around the chest.
By convention, a wave of depolarisation moving towards a lead produces an upward
deflection, and away from it a downward one,
so each lead's trace reflects the direction of the electrical vector relative to it.
The overall direction of the ventricular depolarisation in the frontal plane is the
cardiac axis, normally pointing down and to the left,
determined from the limb leads; deviation of the axis indicates conditions such as
ventricular hypertrophy or conduction defects.
So the twelve-lead electrocardiogram views the heart from twelve orientations — the
limb leads, including Einthoven's triangle,
in the frontal plane and the chest leads in the horizontal — a wave towards a lead
giving an upward deflection; the net direction of ventricular depolarisation is the
cardiac axis, normally down and to the left,
its deviation indicating hypertrophy or conduction defects.
How does the electrocardiogram show myocardial ischaemia and infarction?
The electrocardiogram is central to detecting myocardial ischaemia and infarction,
because the impaired blood supply alters the electrical behaviour of the affected
muscle, producing characteristic changes, chiefly in the ST segment and T wave,
which represent ventricular repolarisation.
In ischaemia, where the supply is inadequate but the muscle still viable,
the typical change is depression of the ST segment and inversion of the T wave,
reflecting the disturbed repolarisation of the under-perfused muscle;
this is the basis of detecting demand ischaemia, including perioperatively.
In acute infarction, where a coronary artery is occluded and muscle is dying,
the characteristic change is elevation of the ST segment in the leads overlying the
affected region — the acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction — evolving over
time, with later development of pathological Q waves indicating established
infarction and T-wave changes.
The leads showing the changes localise the region affected.
So the electrocardiogram shows ischaemia as ST-segment depression and T-wave
inversion, reflecting disturbed repolarisation of under-perfused muscle,
and acute infarction as ST-segment elevation in the affected leads,
evolving with Q-wave formation; changes that detect and localise myocardial
ischaemia and infarction, of major importance in monitoring the at-risk surgical
patient.
Describe the mechanisms of cardiac arrhythmias.
Cardiac arrhythmias — abnormalities of rate,
rhythm or conduction — arise by a limited number of basic mechanisms,
understanding which underlies their classification and treatment.
The first is disordered impulse generation, or automaticity: an abnormal pacemaker,
either an enhanced normal automaticity,
or an ectopic focus elsewhere acquiring automaticity,
or abnormal automaticity in damaged tissue,
generating impulses that compete with or override the sinoatrial node.
The second is triggered activity: abnormal depolarisations — afterdepolarisations —
arising during or after repolarisation,
which if they reach threshold trigger extra beats;
the early afterdepolarisations associated with a prolonged QT interval underlie the
dangerous arrhythmia torsades de pointes.
The third, and a very common mechanism, is re-entry:
instead of the impulse dying out after activating the heart,
it circulates continuously around a circuit — created by an area of slowed
conduction and unidirectional block — re-exciting the tissue repeatedly and driving
a tachyarrhythmia; many tachycardias,
including atrial fibrillation and many ventricular tachycardias, are re-entrant.
So cardiac arrhythmias arise by disordered automaticity — enhanced or ectopic
pacemaking; by triggered activity from afterdepolarisations, as in torsades; and,
very commonly, by re-entry — the continuous circulation of an impulse around a
circuit; a framework of mechanisms underlying the arrhythmias and their treatment.
Describe the bradyarrhythmias and heart block.
Bradyarrhythmias are abnormally slow rhythms,
arising from failure of impulse generation by the sinoatrial node or, importantly,
from failure of conduction — heart block.
Sinus bradycardia is simply a slow sinus rhythm, which may be physiological,
vagally mediated, or due to drugs or disease.
Heart block is impaired conduction through the atrioventricular node or the
conducting system, graded in severity.
First-degree block is a delay — a prolonged P-R interval — with every impulse still
conducted.
Second-degree block is intermittent failure of conduction — some atrial impulses
not reaching the ventricles — of two types:
one with progressive lengthening of the P-R interval until a beat is dropped,
and one with sudden non-conduction.
Third-degree, or complete, heart block is complete failure of conduction,
so that no atrial impulses reach the ventricles,
and the ventricles are driven only by a slow escape pacemaker below the block,
independent of the atria — potentially causing dangerous bradycardia or asystole,
requiring pacing.
So bradyarrhythmias include sinus bradycardia and heart block: first-degree,
a conduction delay; second-degree, intermittent failure; and third-degree,
complete failure with a slow independent ventricular escape — the higher degrees
potentially dangerous and the basis for cardiac pacing, important perioperatively.
Describe the common tachyarrhythmias.
Tachyarrhythmias are abnormally fast rhythms,
classified by their origin above or below the ventricles, and by mechanism.
The supraventricular tachycardias arise above the ventricles.
Atrial fibrillation, the commonest sustained arrhythmia, is a chaotic,
disorganised atrial activity, so the atria do not contract effectively — losing the
atrial contribution to filling — and the ventricles respond irregularly,
often rapidly; it predisposes to thrombus formation in the stagnant atria and so to
stroke.
Atrial flutter is a more organised, rapid atrial re-entry.
The paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardias are usually re-entrant,
involving the atrioventricular node. The ventricular tachyarrhythmias arise in the
ventricles and are more dangerous.
Ventricular tachycardia is a rapid ventricular rhythm that may compromise the
circulation and degenerate further.
Ventricular fibrillation is chaotic,
disorganised ventricular activity producing no effective contraction or output — a
cardiac arrest rhythm requiring immediate defibrillation.
So the tachyarrhythmias comprise the supraventricular — atrial fibrillation with
its chaotic atria, irregular ventricular response and stroke risk, atrial flutter,
and the re-entrant paroxysmal tachycardias — and the more dangerous ventricular
tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation,
the latter a fatal arrest rhythm needing defibrillation;
a classification guiding urgent management.
Describe the QT interval and its importance.
The QT interval, measured from the start of the QRS complex to the end of the T
wave, represents the total duration of ventricular depolarisation and
repolarisation — essentially the duration of the ventricular action potential — and
it is important because its prolongation predisposes to a dangerous arrhythmia.
Because the interval shortens as heart rate rises,
it is corrected for rate to give the corrected QT.
A prolonged QT interval indicates a prolonged, and often non-uniform,
ventricular repolarisation, which creates the conditions for early
afterdepolarisations and triggered activity,
predisposing to the polymorphic ventricular tachycardia torsades de pointes,
which can degenerate into ventricular fibrillation.
QT prolongation may be congenital, from inherited channel abnormalities,
or acquired — most relevantly from many drugs, including some antiarrhythmics,
antiemetics, antipsychotics and antibiotics,
and from electrolyte disturbances such as low potassium, magnesium and calcium.
This is highly relevant to anaesthesia, where several drugs used can prolong the QT.
So the QT interval reflects the duration of ventricular repolarisation,
corrected for rate; its prolongation — congenital,
or acquired from drugs and electrolyte disturbances — predisposes to torsades de
pointes and ventricular fibrillation,
making the recognition and avoidance of QT prolongation, particularly from drugs,
an important anaesthetic concern.
Describe the principles of defibrillation and cardioversion.
Defibrillation and cardioversion are the delivery of an electrical shock to the
heart to terminate a tachyarrhythmia,
and their principle follows from the mechanism of these arrhythmias.
Many dangerous tachyarrhythmias, particularly the re-entrant ones and fibrillation,
depend on the continuous, disorganised circulation of electrical activity through
the myocardium.
A sufficiently strong electrical shock delivered across the heart simultaneously
depolarises a critical mass of the myocardium, rendering it all refractory at once;
this interrupts the circulating wavefronts and abolishes the chaotic activity,
so that, when the tissue recovers, the sinoatrial node can resume control and a
coordinated rhythm — the basis of terminating ventricular fibrillation and other
arrhythmias.
In cardioversion, for organised rhythms with a QRS complex,
the shock is synchronised to the R wave to avoid delivering it during the
vulnerable period of repolarisation, which could itself induce fibrillation;
in defibrillation for ventricular fibrillation, which has no organised complex,
the shock is unsynchronised and immediate.
So defibrillation and cardioversion terminate tachyarrhythmias by a shock that
simultaneously depolarises a critical mass of myocardium,
making it refractory and interrupting the circulating activity so a normal rhythm
can resume — synchronised to the R wave in cardioversion of organised rhythms,
and immediate and unsynchronised in defibrillating ventricular fibrillation.
Summarise the value of the electrocardiogram in anaesthesia.
I would summarise the electrocardiogram as one of the indispensable monitors of
anaesthesia, providing continuous, real-time information about the heart's
electrical activity, on which much management depends.
It continuously displays the heart rate and rhythm,
allowing the immediate detection of the bradyarrhythmias and tachyarrhythmias that
anaesthesia, surgery, autonomic stimulation,
drugs and electrolyte disturbances readily provoke,
and guiding their treatment according to their mechanism.
It detects myocardial ischaemia, through ST-segment and T-wave changes,
in the patient at risk — a major perioperative event.
It reveals the dangerous effects of electrolyte disturbances,
above all the progressive changes of hyperkalaemia,
and the QT prolongation caused by electrolyte disturbance and by many drugs,
warning of the risk of torsades.
It confirms the effect of interventions,
from pacing to defibrillation to drug therapy.
So the electrocardiogram is an indispensable anaesthetic monitor — continuously
revealing the rate and rhythm and so arrhythmias, detecting myocardial ischaemia,
and warning of electrolyte and drug effects such as hyperkalaemia and QT
prolongation — a continuous window on the heart's electrical state that underlies
the safe conduct of anaesthesia.
Describe the chest leads and the normal R-wave progression.
The standard twelve-lead electrocardiogram includes six chest, or precordial,
leads, which view the heart in the horizontal plane,
complementing the six limb leads of the frontal plane,
and together they localise electrical events and disease.
The chest leads are placed in defined positions across the front of the chest,
from the right of the sternum around towards the left axilla,
so that the early leads look at the right ventricle and septum and the later ones
at the left ventricle.
As one moves across these leads, the appearance of the QRS complex changes in a
normal, predictable way — the R-wave progression:
in the early leads the complex is mostly downward, dominated by a deep S wave,
reflecting the rightward and anterior position;
progressively the R wave grows and the S wave shrinks,
until the later leads show a tall R wave, reflecting the dominant left ventricle.
Loss of this normal progression suggests pathology,
such as a previous anterior infarction.
So the six chest leads view the heart in the horizontal plane from the right
ventricle and septum round to the left ventricle,
with a normal R-wave progression — from an S-dominant pattern in the early leads to
an R-dominant pattern in the later — whose loss indicates disease such as anterior
infarction; the chest leads localising cardiac electrical events.
Describe the bundle branch blocks.
Bundle branch block is a disturbance of the rapid conduction of the impulse through
one of the two main branches of the bundle that normally distribute it to the
ventricles, and it produces a characteristic broadening of the QRS complex.
Normally the impulse passes rapidly down both the right and the left bundle
branches and the Purkinje network, depolarising both ventricles almost
simultaneously, giving a narrow QRS.
If one branch is blocked, the impulse cannot pass down it,
so that ventricle is depolarised late and slowly,
by spread of the impulse from the other side through ordinary muscle; this delayed,
abnormal activation broadens the QRS complex beyond its normal limit and alters its
shape in a pattern characteristic of which branch is blocked.
Right bundle branch block and left bundle branch block have distinct patterns;
left bundle branch block in particular often signifies underlying heart disease and
obscures the interpretation of ischaemia.
So bundle branch block is the failure of conduction down one bundle branch,
so that the affected ventricle is activated late and slowly through ordinary
muscle, broadening the QRS complex in a pattern characteristic of the side blocked
— left bundle branch block especially indicating disease and hindering ischaemia
interpretation.
Describe ventricular pre-excitation and the Wolff-Parkinson-White pattern.
Ventricular pre-excitation is a condition in which an additional,
abnormal conducting pathway exists between the atria and the ventricles,
bypassing the normal atrioventricular node,
so that part of the ventricle is activated early,
and it predisposes to a dangerous tachycardia.
Normally the only electrical connection between atria and ventricles is the
atrioventricular node, whose delay protects the ventricles;
in pre-excitation an accessory pathway, a strand of muscle,
provides a second connection that conducts faster, without the protective delay.
The Wolff-Parkinson-White pattern on the electrocardiogram reflects this:
the early activation shortens the interval from the P wave to the QRS,
and produces a characteristic slurred initial upstroke of the QRS, the delta wave.
The danger is twofold: the pathway can sustain a re-entrant tachycardia circulating
between it and the node; and, if atrial fibrillation occurs,
the pathway may conduct the rapid atrial impulses dangerously fast to the
ventricles.
So pre-excitation is the presence of an accessory atrioventricular pathway
bypassing the node, activating the ventricle early — seen as a short P-R interval
and a delta wave in the Wolff-Parkinson-White pattern — and predisposing to
re-entrant tachycardia and to dangerously rapid conduction in atrial fibrillation,
of relevance to anaesthesia.
Describe the effects of potassium and calcium disturbances on the electrocardiogram.
The electrocardiogram is sensitive to disturbances of the plasma potassium and
calcium, because these ions govern the cardiac action potential,
and recognising the changes can be life-saving.
For potassium: hyperkalaemia, a high plasma potassium,
progressively affects the trace — first peaking the T waves,
then flattening the P waves and broadening the QRS complex, and ultimately,
as it worsens, merging into a sine-wave pattern and asystole, a medical emergency;
hypokalaemia, a low potassium, flattens the T waves and produces prominent U waves
and a long Q-T, predisposing to arrhythmia.
For calcium: hypocalcaemia prolongs the Q-T interval, by lengthening the plateau,
while hypercalcaemia shortens it.
These changes matter perioperatively,
where electrolyte disturbances are common and where, for example,
the peaked T waves of hyperkalaemia may be the first warning of a dangerous level.
So the electrocardiogram reflects electrolyte disturbances:
hyperkalaemia peaks the T waves, then broadens the QRS towards a sine wave and
asystole, hypokalaemia flattens T waves with U waves and a long Q-T,
and calcium alters the Q-T — prolonged in hypocalcaemia,
shortened in hypercalcaemia; changes of practical, sometimes urgent, importance.
Describe the degrees of atrioventricular block.
Atrioventricular block is a disturbance of conduction between the atria and the
ventricles, graded by severity into three degrees,
important because the higher degrees can cause dangerous bradycardia.
First-degree block is a simple prolongation of the time taken for the impulse to
traverse the atrioventricular node — a long P-R interval — but every impulse still
conducts; it is usually benign.
Second-degree block is intermittent failure of conduction,
so that some atrial impulses fail to reach the ventricles; it has two types — one,
the Wenckebach or Mobitz type one, with progressive lengthening of conduction until
a beat is dropped, usually benign; the other, Mobitz type two,
with sudden failure of conduction, which is more dangerous and may progress.
Third-degree, or complete, block is total failure of conduction,
so that no atrial impulse reaches the ventricles,
which are then driven only by a slow, unreliable escape rhythm from below,
independent of the atria — a cause of dangerous bradycardia requiring pacing.
So atrioventricular block is graded as first-degree — delayed but complete
conduction; second-degree — intermittent failure,
of the benign Wenckebach or the more dangerous Mobitz type two;
and third-degree — complete failure with a slow escape rhythm;
the higher degrees risking dangerous bradycardia and needing pacing.
Why are leads two and V5 used for intraoperative monitoring?
In the operating theatre, the electrocardiogram is monitored continuously,
and the choice of which leads to display is a practical application of the
principles of lead orientation, directed at the two main things to watch — the
rhythm and ischaemia.
Lead two is a limb lead oriented along the heart's normal axis,
roughly in the direction of atrial and ventricular depolarisation,
so it shows a clear, large P wave and QRS complex;
this makes it the best lead for monitoring the rhythm and detecting arrhythmias,
since the P wave, key to diagnosing the rhythm, is well seen.
Lead V5 is a chest lead positioned over the left ventricle,
the region most often affected by ischaemia and supplied by the vulnerable coronary
circulation; it is therefore the single most sensitive lead for detecting the
ST-segment changes of left ventricular ischaemia.
Monitoring both, in combination, covers both rhythm and ischaemia.
So lead two is chosen for rhythm monitoring because, aligned with the heart's axis,
it shows the P wave and QRS clearly, while lead V5, over the left ventricle,
is the most sensitive for detecting ischaemic ST changes;
the combination giving the best intraoperative surveillance of rhythm and ischaemia.
Describe ectopic beats and their significance.
An ectopic beat is a heartbeat that arises prematurely from a focus other than the
normal sinoatrial pacemaker, interrupting the regular rhythm,
and such beats are common and usually benign but occasionally significant.
They arise when a site in the atria, the junction,
or the ventricles depolarises and triggers a beat before the next expected sinus
beat, through enhanced automaticity or a triggered or re-entrant mechanism.
An atrial ectopic produces an early, abnormal P wave; a ventricular ectopic,
arising below the bundle, produces an early, broad, abnormal QRS,
not preceded by a P wave, because the ventricles are activated abnormally.
They are felt as missed or extra beats.
Their significance varies: occasional ectopics are common in normal hearts and
benign; but frequent ventricular ectopics,
or those occurring in the context of heart disease,
ischaemia or electrolyte disturbance, may herald more serious arrhythmias.
So an ectopic beat is a premature beat from an abnormal focus — an early abnormal P
wave if atrial, an early broad QRS if ventricular;
usually benign in the normal heart,
but potentially significant when frequent or in the context of disease,
ischaemia or electrolyte disturbance, a common finding to interpret in context.
Describe the physiology underlying cardiac pacing.
Artificial cardiac pacing applies the physiology of cardiac excitation to treat
dangerous bradycardia or block by supplying an electrical stimulus to initiate
cardiac contraction when the heart's own system fails.
The principle is that an electrical impulse delivered to the myocardium,
of sufficient strength, will depolarise it and trigger a propagated action
potential and contraction, just as the natural impulse does — substituting for the
failed natural pacemaker or conduction.
A pacemaker delivers such impulses through electrodes placed in contact with the
heart, at a controlled rate; modern devices sense the heart's own activity and pace
only when needed, and can pace the atrium, the ventricle,
or both in sequence to preserve the atrial contribution to filling.
Pacing may be permanent, by an implanted device, or temporary,
including the external and transvenous methods used in emergencies and
perioperatively. Implanted defibrillators extend the principle to terminating
dangerous tachyarrhythmias.
So cardiac pacing applies the physiology of excitation,
delivering an electrical stimulus that depolarises the myocardium to trigger
contraction, substituting for failed natural pacemaking or conduction,
at a controlled rate and sensing the heart's own activity — a direct clinical
application of cardiac electrophysiology,
with implications for the perioperative management of these devices.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The conducting system runs from the sinoatrial node (pacemaker) across the
atria to the atrioventricular node (where conduction is slowed — the AV delay),
then through the bundle of His, bundle branches and Purkinje fibres to the
ventricles — generating and conducting the impulse for timed,
coordinated contraction.
Second, The sinoatrial node shows automaticity — an unstable potential with a slow
spontaneous pacemaker depolarisation (funny current, declining potassium efflux,
calcium currents) reaching threshold to fire a calcium-driven action potential;
it dominates because it has the fastest intrinsic rate (overdrive suppression),
with the AV junction and ventricle as slower escape pacemakers.
Third, Heart rate and conduction are set by opposing autonomic divisions:
the parasympathetic (vagal acetylcholine on muscarinic receptors) slows rate and AV
conduction and dominates at rest; the sympathetic (noradrenaline on beta-1
receptors) increases rate, conduction and contractility.
4.
The ECG records the summed electrical activity at the body surface:
the P wave (atrial depolarisation), QRS (ventricular depolarisation),
and T wave (ventricular repolarisation); the PR interval reflects AV conduction,
the QRS duration ventricular depolarisation,
and the QT interval the ventricular action-potential duration — the electrical
events preceding the mechanical.
Fourth, The conducting system and ECG are central to anaesthesia:
the ECG is a fundamental continuous monitor of rate and rhythm,
detecting arrhythmias and myocardial ischaemia (ST/T changes) and revealing
electrolyte effects (the progressive changes of hyperkalaemia;
QT changes with calcium) and drug effects (QT prolongation).
Thank you. That concludes the station.